---
layout: post
title:  "Pictures of $\\Spec$"
date:   2019-11-28
author: Hidenori
---

# Proposition
Draw pictures of $\Spec(\mathbb{Z}), \Spec(\mathbb{R}), \Spec(\mathbb{C}[x]), \Spec(\mathbb{R}[x]), \Spec(\mathbb{Z}[x])$.

# Solution

I am not sure how to draw pictures of these spaces, so I will just describe them in words.

## $\Spec(\mathbb{Z})$
$\Spec(\mathbb{Z}) = \\{ (0) \\} \cup \\{ (p) \mid p \text{ prime} \\}$.

Let $E \subset \mathbb{Z}$.
If $E$ is empty or $E = \\{ 0 \\}$, $V(E) = \Spec(\mathbb{Z})$.

Let $p$ be a prime number.

* If there exists $x \in E$ such that $p \nmid x$, then $E \not\subset (p)$.
* If $\forall x \in E, p \mid x$, then $E \subset (p)$.

Thus this is a necessary and sufficient condition for $(p)$ to be in $V(E)$.
Since $E$ contains a nonzero element, $V(E)$ must be finite.

On the other hand, given primes $p_1, \cdots, p_n$, $V(\\{ p_1p_2 \cdots p_n \\}) = \\{ (p_1), \cdots, (p_n) \\}$.

Therefore, all closed sets in $\Spec(\mathbb{Z})$ are:

* any finite set of the form $\\{ (p_1), \cdots, (p_n) \\}$,
* $\\{ (0) \\}$, 
* $\Spec(\mathbb{Z})$.

## $\Spec(\mathbb{R})$

The only ideals of $\mathbb{R}$ are $(0)$ and $\mathbb{R}$ because $\mathbb{R}$ is a field.
Thus the only prime ideal is $(0)$.

## $\Spec(\mathbb{C}[x])$.
From algebra, we know that $\mathbb{C}[x]$ is a PID.
(For instance, Corollary 4 [P.300, Dummit and Foote].)

If an ideal is generated by a polynomial of degree 2 or above, it cannot be a prime ideal because every polynomial in $\mathbb{C}[x]$ splits into linear factors.
If an ideal is generated by a polynomial of degree 1, then it must be a maximal ideal because any ideal containing it must be generated by a nonzero, degree-0 polynomial, which is a unit in $\mathbb{C}[x]$.
Therefore, $\Spec(\mathbb{C}[x])$ is the set of ideals generated by a polynomial of degree 1.

Let $x - a \in \mathbb{C}[x]$ be a polynomial of degree 1.
Let $E \subset \mathbb{C}[x]$.
Suppose $E \ne \emptyset$ and $E \ne (0)$.
$(x - a) \in V(E)$ if and only if $\forall p(x) \in E, p(a) = 0$.

$E$ contains a nonzero polynomial that has a finite number of roots.
Therefore, $V(E)$ must contain a finite number of prime ideals.
On the other hand, for any finite number of prime ideals $(x - a_1), \cdots, (x - a_k) \in \Spec(\mathbb{C}[x])$, $E = (x - a_1) \cdots (x - a_k)$ gives us $V(E) = \\{ (x - a_1), \cdots, (x - a_k) \\}$.

Therefore, all closed sets in $\Spec(\mathbb{C}[x])$ are:

* any finite set of the form $\\{ (x - a_1), \cdots, (x - a_n) \\}$,
* $\\{ (0) \\}$, 
* $\Spec(\mathbb{C}[x])$.
