---
layout: post
title:  "A Special Case of the Weak Nullstellensatz"
date:   2019-09-25
author: Hidenori
---

# Proposition
Let $X = \mathbb{C}^n$ and $A = \mathbb{C}[x_1, \cdots, x_n]$.

Maximal ideals of $A$ are in one-to-one correspondence with points $P \in X$.
That is

$$
\begin{align*}
  P = (a_1, \cdots, a_n) \in X \iff m_P = (x_1 - a_1, \cdots, x_n - a_n) \subset A.
\end{align*}
$$

# Proof
Unfortunately, I don't know how to prove this, but I found this proposition in P.5 of Undergraduate Commutative Algebra.
This is a special case of [the weak Nullstellensatz](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hilbert's_Nullstellensatz).

# Example
Although I don't know how to prove this, this proposition is believable.

Let $P = (1, 2, 3)$.
Then $m_P = (x_1 - 1, x_2 - 2, x_3 - 3)$.
In other words, $m_P$ is the ideal of $A$ generated by three polynomials $x_1 - 1, x_2 - 2, x_3 - 3$.
Then $m_P$ is a maximal ideal.

Note: $m_P$ is *NOT* generated by $(x_1 - 1)(x_2 - 2)(x_3 - 3)$. It is generated by the three polynomials.

On the other hand, let $m \subset A$ be a maximal ideal.
I don't know how to prove it, but it is believable that $m$ is generated by three polynomials $x_1 - a_1, x_2 - a_2, x_3 - a_3$ because:

* $\mathbb{C}$ is algebraically closed.
  If $m$ is generated by a polynomial of degree 2 such as $x^2 + 1$, then the ideal $(x - i, x + i)$ will properly contain $m$.
  Since $m$ is a maximal ideal, $m$ cannot be generated by a polynomial of degree 2 or above.
* The ideal $(x_1 - a_1, x_2 - a_2)$ is property contained in $(x_1 - a_1, x_2 - a_2, x_3 - a_3)$.
  Therefore, it sort of makes sense that $m$ is generated by three polynomials each of which contains exactly one variable.

# Why is this important?
This shows some connection between algebraic objects and geometric objects.
