---
layout: post
title:  "Notes for Fast Reed-Solomon Interactive Oracle Proofs of Proximity(TODO)"
date:   2023-12-04
author: Hidenori
---

Notes for _Fast Reed-Solomon Interactive Oracle Proofs of Proximity_.

## P9. $f^{(1)} \in \text{RS}[\mathbb{F}, L^{(1)}, \rho]$.

> _Assuming $f^{(0)} \in \text{RS}[\mathbb{F}, L^{(0)}, \rho]$, the discussion above shows that $f^{(1)} \in \text{RS}[\mathbb{F}, L^{(1)}, \rho]$._

It wasn't super obvious to me, so here is a more detailed explanation.

Suppose $f^{(0)} \in \text{RS}[\mathbb{F}, L^{(0)}, \rho]$.

Then this means there exists a polynomial $P(x) \in \mathbb{F}[x]$ such that:

- $\deg(P(x)) < \rho 2^n$, and
- $\forall x \in L^{(0)}, f^{(0)}(x) = P(x)$.

The subtle yet important point is that this does not mean that $f^{(0)}(x)$ is a polynomial in $\text{RS}[\mathbb{F}, L^{(0)}, \rho]$.
We claim that $f^{(0)}$ is a function that agrees with $P(x)$ when restricted to the domain $L^{(0)}$.

Let $P^{(0)}(x)$ denote such a polynomial.
Let $P^{(0)}(x) = P_0^{(1)}(x^2) + P_1^{(1)}(x^2)$ and $Q^{(1)}(X, Y) = P_0^{(1)}(Y) + X \cdot P_1^{(1)}(Y)$ as defined in the paper.

As described in the paper, $\max(\deg(P_0^{(1)}), \deg(P_1{(1)})) < \rho 2^{n - 1}$.

Then the verifier samples $x^{(0)} \in \mathbb{F}$ and sends it to the prover.
The prover responds with $f^{(1)}$ such that $f^{(1)}(y) = Q^{(1)}(x^{(0)}, y)$ for all $y \in L^{(1)}$ where $L^{(1)} = \\{ x^2 \mid x \in L^{(0)} \\}$.
Again, $f^{(1)}$ is not necessarily equal to $Q^{(1)}$, or even a polynomial.
We claim that those two functions take the same value over $L^{(1)}$.

Finally, we want to show $f^{(1)} \in \text{RS}[\mathbb{F}, L^{(1)}, \rho]$.
This is, by definition, equivalent to showing the existence of $p(x)$ such that:

- $\deg(p(x)) < \rho \abs{L^{(1)}} = \rho 2^{n - 1}$, and
- $\forall x \in L^{(1)}, f^{(1)}(x) = p(x)$.

Let $p(x) = P_0^{(1)}(x) + x_0 \cdot P_1^{(1)}(x)$.

1. $p$ is obviously a polynomial over $\mathbb{F}$ and $\deg(p(x)) < \rho 2^{n - 1}$.
2. For any $x \in L^{(1)}$, $f^{(1)}(x) = Q^{(1)}(x^{(0)}, x) = P_0^{(1)}(x) + x^{(0)}P_1^{(1)}(x) = p(x)$.

Therefore, $f^{(1)} \in \text{RS}[\mathbb{F}, L^{(1)}, \rho]$ as desired.
