---
layout: post
title:  "Overview of FRI(TLDR version)"
date:   2023-12-04
author: Hidenori
---

TLDR summary of [this excellent article](https://aszepieniec.github.io/stark-anatomy/fri).

Let $\mathbb{F}$ be a finite field.
Let $f(x) = \sum_{i=0}^d c_ix^i \in \mathbb{F}[x]$.

Then $f(x) = f_e(x^2) + xf_o(x^2)$ where $f_e, f_o$ are the even and odd polynomials.
More specifically, $f_e(x^2) = \frac{f(x) + f(-x)}{2}, f_o(x^2) = \frac{f(x) - f(-x)}{2x}$.

Let $f_{\alpha}(x) = f_e(x) + \alpha f_o(x)$ for any $\alpha \in \mathbb{F}$.

Let $\omega \in \mathbb{F}$ be given such that $\omega$ is the $N$-th root of unity where $N$ is even.
But realistically, I think it makes more sense if $N$ is a power of 2.

# Step 1: Commit $f(x)$

The prover constructs a Merkle tree with leaves $f(\omega^0), f(\omega^1), f(\omega^2), \cdots, f(\omega^{N - 1})$.
The prover sends the root hash to the verifier.

# Step 2: A random challenge $\alpha$

The verifier sends the prover a random challenge $\alpha$.

# Step 3: Commit $f_{\alpha(x)}$

The prover constructs a Merkle tree with leaves $f_{\alpha}(\omega^0), f_{\alpha}(\omega^1), f_{\alpha}(\omega^2), \cdots, f_{\alpha}(\omega^{N - 1})$.
The prover sends the root hash to the verifier.

# Step 4: A random challenge $i = 0, \cdots, N - 1$.

The verifier sends the prover a random challenge $i$.

# Step 5: The prover responds to $i$

The prover calculates and sends:

1. $f(\omega^i)$ and its merkle proof,
1. $f(-\omega^i)$ and its merkle proof,
1. $f_{\alpha}(\omega^i)$ and its merkle proof

to the verifier.

# Step 6: Verification
The verifier can verify the following:

1. In Step 1 and 3, the prover _probably_ committed those three values to the merkle trees.
1. Using the definition of $f_e, f_o, f_{\alpha}$, the three values are correctly related and thus the prover _probably_ constructed the two merkle trees correctly.

# Step 7: Divide and repeat

Let $f = f_{\alpha}$ and $\omega = \omega^2$.
Notice that $f_{\alpha}$ has a degree $d / 2$.
Then go back to Step 1 and repeat until the degree is 0.

