---
layout: post
title:  "What is Zero Knowledge Proof: Part 2"
date:   2023-06-02
author: Hidenori
---

This post is inspired by "Why and How zk-SNARK Works: Definitive Explanation" by Maksym Petkus.

# Proof that you know a polynomial

[The last post](/2023/06/01/zk-part-1.html) explains a (over) simplified version of what ZK is.
Also, we talked about how polynomials are secretly important.
We will first develop a baby approach that alone is not useful.
In the next post, we will build something interesting on top of this.

# Problem statement

We have a Prover and a Verifier.

They both know a polynomial `t(x)`.

And Prover wants to convince Verifier that they know a polynomial `p(x)` that is divisible by `t(x)`.
Since `p(x)` is special, Prover doesn't want to tell what it is to Verifier.

# Approach

1. Verifier picks a random number `s` and sends it to Prover.
1. Prover calculates `p(s)` and sends it back.
1. Verifier checks if `t(s)` divides `p(s)`.

# Rationale
If `t(x)` really divides `p(x)`, then `t(s)` must divide `p(s)`.
The converse is not true, but you can see the motivation for this approach.

Obviously, this approach has many issues.
We will solve a few of them by applying homomorphic encryption.

# Homomorphic encryption

We will use [homomorphic encryption](/2023/04/03/homomorphic-encryption-examples.html) since we can multiply and add encrypted values without decrypting.


1. Verifier picks the following:
    - $s$ a secret code
    - $(g, n)$ two random positive integers.
1. Verifier calculates $g^{s^0} \pmod{n}, g^{s^1} \pmod{n}, \cdots$ and sends them to Prover.
1. Prover calculates $g^{p(s)} \pmod{n}, g^{h(s)} \pmod{n}$ where $h(x) = p(x) / t(x)$ and sends it back.
1. Verifier checks $g^{p(s)} = (g^{h(s)})^{t(s)} \pmod n$.

From here, I will omit $\pmod n$ whenever it is obvious.

It might seem unclear as to why we send $g^{s^i}$'s.
This is because Prover can't calculate $g^{p(s)}$ without it.
For instance, assume $p(x) = x^2 + 3x + 4$.

Then, without ever knowing what $s$ is, Prover can calculate $g^{p(s)}$ by

$$
\begin{align*}
    g^{p(s)}
        &= g^{s^2 + 3s + 4} \\
        &= g^{s^2}g^{3s}g^{4} \\
        &= g^{s^2}(g^{s^1})^3(g^{s^0})^{4},
\end{align*}
$$

and Prover is given the values of $g^{s^2}, g^{s^1}, g^{s^0}$.

It might also seem strange that we calculated $h(x)$ that we didn't calculate before.
This is because there is no straightforward way of telling if $a$ divides $b$ when given $g^a$ and $g^b$.

It is obvious that one can easily do the same thing by using other practical encryption methods such as elliptic curves.



